editorial review of saga concurrency (#4511)
Particular/docs.particular.net: nservicebus/sagas/concurrency.md

---
title: Saga concurrency
summary: NServiceBus ensures consistency between saga state and messaging.
component: Core
tags:
- Saga
redirects:
- nservicebus/nservicebus-sagas-and-concurrency
reviewed: 2019-09-24
related:
- persistence/nhibernate/saga-concurrency
- persistence/ravendb/saga-concurrency
- persistence/sql/saga-concurrency
---

> An [endpoint](/nservicebus/concept-overview.md#endpoint) may be configured to allow [concurrent processing of messages](/nservicebus/operations/tuning.md#tuning-concurrency). On a machine with more than one logical CPU, concurrent processing is enabled by default. An endpoint may also be [scaled out](/nservicebus/architecture/scaling.md#scaling-out-to-multiple-nodes) to multiple nodes. In these scenarios, multiple messages may be handled simultaneously by a single logical saga. To ensure consistency between saga state and messages, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handling thread creates, updates, or deletes saga state in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending new messages.

Author: I think I prefer the more explicit version.

> An [endpoint](/nservicebus/concept-overview.md#endpoint) may be configured to allow [concurrent processing of messages](/nservicebus/operations/tuning.md#tuning-concurrency). On a machine with more than one logical CPU, concurrent processing is enabled by default. An endpoint may also be [scaled out](/nservicebus/architecture/scaling.md#scaling-out-to-multiple-nodes) to multiple nodes. In these scenarios, multiple messages may be handled simultaneously by a single logical saga. To ensure consistency between saga state and messages, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handling thread creates, updates, or deletes saga state in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending new messages.

Reviewer: Ok, fair enough, just thought it was a wall of text :)

> An [endpoint](/nservicebus/concept-overview.md#endpoint) may be configured to allow [concurrent processing of messages](/nservicebus/operations/tuning.md#tuning-concurrency). On a machine with more than one logical CPU, concurrent processing is enabled by default. An endpoint may also be [scaled out](/nservicebus/architecture/scaling.md#scaling-out-to-multiple-nodes) to multiple nodes. In these scenarios, multiple messages may be handled simultaneously by a single logical saga. To ensure consistency between saga state and messages, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handling thread creates, updates, or deletes saga state in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending new messages.

Author: > On a machine with more than one logical CPU, concurrent processing is enabled by default.

I'm removing this sentence entirely. The details of default settings, etc. are in the linked article.

> > NServiceBus ensures that only one message handling thread creates, updates, or deletes saga state in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending new messages.

> We really shouldn't be talking about threads here since we don't manage threads at all, but instead are looking at concurrent tasks.

I'll rework this (and the rest of the document) to remove references to threads.

> Also, this sentence seems to ignore the the scaled out scenario entirely. Perhaps this paragraph needs to be split to not try and combine both scenarios? They really aren't the same thing an aren't handled the same way.

What is different about the two scenarios? As I understand it, we still guarantee the same level of transactionality, whether it's between two handlers in the same process, or two handlers in different processes.

Saga state is created when a saga is started by a message. It may be updated when the saga handles another message. It is deleted when the saga handles another message which completes the saga. In any of these cases, multiple messages may be handled simultaneously.

## Starting a saga

> When messages are handled concurrently that start the same logical saga, NServiceBus ensures that only one message starts the saga. This is done in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending new messages.

Author: For some downstreams, you have to use the outbox, but that should be contained in the docs for those downstreams. I.e. when I choose that downstream, the docs should tell me that transactionality requires the outbox. But perhaps I'll add a note about it in this doc too.

Only one message handling thread is allowed to succeed. The saga state is created and sent messages are dispatched. The other message handling threads fail, roll back, and enter [recoverability](/nservicebus/recoverability/). When those messages are retried, the existing saga state is found. Handling the messages may involve changing the state or completing the saga. See below for how those scenarios are handled.

## Changes to saga state

When messages are handled concurrently by the same logical saga, and involve changing the saga state, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handling thread changes the state in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending any new messages.

> When using [SQL persistence](/persistence/sql/saga-concurrency.md), the messages are handled in serial, one after another. In this case, all the message handling threads are allowed to succeed.

Author: I'm going to change it to remove mentions of SQL specifically, and instead link to the persisters section for details. But I'd still like this document to mention both scenarios.

For all other persisters, only one message handling thread is allowed to succeed. The saga state is updated, and sent messages are dispatched. The other message handling threads fail, roll back, and enter [recoverability](/nservicebus/recoverability/). When those messages are retried, the process repeats. One or more of those messages may attempt to complete the saga. See below for how that scenario is handled.

## Completing a saga

> When messages are handled concurrently by the same logical saga, and the handling of at least one message involves completing the saga, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handling thread completes the saga. This is done in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending any new messages.

Reviewer 2: > When messages are handled concurrently by the same logical saga, and the handling of at least one message involves completing the saga, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handling thread completes the saga.

I think this sentence could benefit from some restructuring, similar to what I suggested in the other sections.

> When messages are handled concurrently by the same logical saga, and the handling of at least one message involves completing the saga, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handling thread completes the saga. This is done in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending any new messages.

Reviewer 2: Same comments about transactions and threads apply here.

> When using [SQL persistence](/persistence/sql/saga-concurrency.md), the messages are handled in serial, one after another.

Reviewer 2: Same comment here about avoiding specific persister details.

For all other persisters, only one message handling thread is allowed to succeed. The saga state is deleted, and sent messages are dispatched. The other message handling threads fail, roll back, and enter [recoverability](/nservicebus/recoverability/).

In both cases, when subsequent messages are handled, the saga state is not found and the [messages are discarded](/nservicebus/sagas/saga-not-found.md).

> ### High load scenarios

Reviewer 2: This isn't specific to Completing a saga, so I think it should be `##` instead of `###`.

---
title: Saga concurrency
summary: NServiceBus ensures consistency between saga state and messaging.
component: Core
tags:
- Saga
redirects:
- nservicebus/nservicebus-sagas-and-concurrency
reviewed: 2019-09-24
related:
- persistence/nhibernate/saga-concurrency
- persistence/ravendb/saga-concurrency
- persistence/sql/saga-concurrency
---

> An [endpoint](/nservicebus/concept-overview.md#endpoint) may be configured to allow [concurrent handling of messages](/nservicebus/operations/tuning.md#tuning-concurrency). An endpoint may also be [scaled out](/nservicebus/architecture/scaling.md#scaling-out-to-multiple-nodes) to multiple nodes. In these scenarios, multiple messages may be handled simultaneously by a single logical saga. To ensure consistency between saga state and messages, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handler creates, updates, or deletes saga state in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending new messages. In this document, "handling" a message refers to the invocation of any saga method that processes a message, such as `IAmStartedByMessages<T>.Handle()`, `IHandleTimeouts<T>.Timeout()`, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An [endpoint](/nservicebus/concept-overview.md#endpoint) may be configured to allow [concurrent handling of messages](/nservicebus/operations/tuning.md#tuning-concurrency). An endpoint may also be [scaled out](/nservicebus/architecture/scaling.md#scaling-out-to-multiple-nodes) to multiple instances. In these scenarios, multiple messages may be handled simultaneously by a single logical saga instance. To ensure consistency between saga state and messages on the same saga type instance, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handler creates, updates, or deletes saga state.

In this document, "handling" a message refers to the invocation of any saga method that processes a message, such as `IAmStartedByMessages<T>.Handle()`, `IHandleTimeouts<T>.Timeout()`, etc.
```

Reviewer 3: I removed the transaction bit as not all persisters support transactions

> NOTE: When using some transports, the [outbox](/nservicebus/outbox/) must be used in order to provide this level of consistency.

Reviewer 3: Some persisters do not support outbox and saga consistency cannot be guaranteed unless the saga state itself has outbox data embedded.

Author: @ramonsmits I'm not sure what you mean but this. Let's discuss.

Saga state is created when a saga is started by a message. It may be updated when the saga handles another message. It is deleted when the saga handles another message which completes the saga. In any of these cases, multiple messages may be handled simultaneously.

## Starting a saga

> When messages that start the same logical saga are handled simultaneously, NServiceBus ensures that only one message starts the saga. This is done in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending new messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When messages that start the same logical saga instance are handled simultaneously, NServiceBus ensures that only one message starts the saga by enforcing uniqueness on the saga correlation identifier. First writer wins.
```

Only one message handler is allowed to succeed. The saga state is created and sent messages are dispatched. The other message handlers fail, roll back, and their messages enter [recoverability](/nservicebus/recoverability/). When those messages are retried, the existing saga state is found. Handling the messages may involve changing the state or completing the saga. See below for how those scenarios are handled.

partial: unique

## Changes to saga state

> When messages are handled simultaneously by the same logical saga, and involve changing the saga state, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handler changes the state in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending any new messages.

Reviewer 2: The "same transaction" language that's used here and other places in the document is sticking out a bit to me. What exactly is trying to be conveyed here? Why bring transactions into it at all?

Author: Agreed. "transaction" is a bit overloaded, and could confuse things. I'll find an alternate term/phrase.

> When messages are handled simultaneously by the same logical saga, and involve changing the saga state, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handler changes the state in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending any new messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When messages are handled simultaneously by the same logical saga instance, and involve modifying the saga state, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handler succeeds in persisting the state. Any messages to be dispatched only happen if persisting the saga succeeds.
```

> When using some persisters, the messages are handled in serial, one after another. In this case, all message handlers are allowed to succeed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using a persister that supports pessimistic locking, saga handlers invocations on the same saga instance (not type) are sequential, one after another. 
```

When using other persisters, only one message handler is allowed to succeed. The saga state is updated, and sent messages are dispatched. The other message handlers fail, roll back, and their messages enter [recoverability](/nservicebus/recoverability/). When those messages are retried, the process repeats. One or more of those messages may attempt to complete the saga. See below for how that scenario is handled.

See the [documentation for each persister](/persistence/) for details of which method is used.

## Completing a saga

When messages are handled simultaneously by the same logical saga, and the handling of at least one message involves completing the saga, NServiceBus ensures that only one message handler completes the saga. This is done in the same transaction as receiving the message and sending any new messages.

> When using some persisters, the messages are handled in serial, one after another.

Reviewer 2: Is "in serial" common usage? It sounds awkward to me.

Reviewer 3: Also, its not correct, only saga state is persisted sequentially. Saga handlers can be processed in parallel. 
```suggestion
When using a persister that support pessimistic locking, saga handlers invocations on the same saga instance (not type) are sequential, one after another due.
```

Author: > Is "in serial" common usage? It sounds awkward to me.

Probably not. I'll change it.

Author: > Also, its not correct, only saga state is persisted sequentially. Saga handlers can be processed in parallel.

I'm not sure that's correct, and your suggestion doesn't suggest that either. Because pessimistic locking is used, the handler are effectively executed one after another, since the method is only invoked after the data has been read, which doesn't occur until after another handler has finished and the data from that handler is persisted. If that were not the case, and they were executed in parallel, then they would have dirty reads, and the pessimistic locking would not be occurring.

When using other persisters, only one message handler is allowed to succeed. The saga state is deleted, and sent messages are dispatched. The other message handlers fail, roll back, and their messages enter [recoverability](/nservicebus/recoverability/).

In both cases, when subsequent messages are handled, the saga state is not found and the [messages are discarded](/nservicebus/sagas/saga-not-found.md).

See the [documentation for each persister](/persistence/) for details of which method is used.

> ## High load scenarios

Reviewer 2: Should this be "High-load scenarios" ?

Author: Probably. I'll change it.

Author: ```suggestion
## High-load scenarios
```

> Under high load, simultaneous access to saga state may lead to a high number of retries. Those retries may be exhausted, resulting in messages being moved to the error queue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Under high load, concurrent write access to saga state may lead to a high number of retries. Those retries may be exhausted, resulting in messages being moved to the error queue.
```
